 Pollution is the effect of undesirable changes in
 our surroundings that have harmful effects on
 plants, animals and human beings. This occurs
 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
 112
 4/9/2004, 5:09 PM
when only short-term economic gains are made
 at the cost of the long-term ecological benefits
 for humanity. No natural phenomenon has led
 to greater ecological changes than have been
 made by mankind. During the last few decades
 we have contaminated our air, water and land
 on which life itself depends with a variety of
 waste products.
 Pollutants include solid, liquid or gaseous sub
stances present in greater than natural abun
dance produced due to human activity, which
 have a detrimental effect on our environment.
 The nature and concentration of a pollutant
 determines the severity of detrimental effects
 on human health. An average human requires
 about 12 kg of air each day, which is nearly 12
 to15 times greater than the amount of food we
 eat. Thus even a small concentration of pollut
ants in the air becomes more significant in com
parison to the similar levels present in food.
 Pollutants that enter water have the ability to
 spread to distant places especially in the marine
 ecosystem.
 From an ecological perspective pollutants can
 be classified as follows:
 Degradable or non-persistent pollutants: These
 can be rapidly broken down by natural pro
cesses. Eg: domestic sewage, discarded veg
etables, etc.
 Slowly degradable or persistent pollutants: Pol
lutants that remain in the environment for many
 years in an unchanged condition and take de
cades or longer to degrade. Eg: DDT and most
 plastics.
 Non-degradable pollutants: These cannot be
 degraded by natural processes. Once they are
 released into the environment they are difficult
 to eradicate and continue to accumulate. Eg:
 toxic elements like lead or mercury.
 Pollution
 Chapter5.p65
 5.2 CAUSES, EFFECTS AND CONTROL MEA
SURES OF POLLUTION
 5.2.1 Air Pollution
 History of air pollution: The origin of air pol
lution on the earth can be traced from the times
 when man started using firewood as a means
 of cooking and heating. Hippocrates has men
tioned air pollution in 400 BC. With the discov
ery and increasing use of coal, air pollution
 became more pronounced especially in urban
 areas. It was recognized as a problem 700 years
 ago in London in the form of smoke pollution,
 which prompted King Edward I to make the first
 antipollution law to restrict people from using
 coal for domestic heating in the year 1273. In
 the year 1300 another Act banning the use of
 coal was passed. Defying the law led to imposi
tion of capital punishment. In spite of this air
 pollution became a serious problem in London
 during the industrial revolution due to the use
 of coal in industries. The earliest recorded ma
jor disaster was the ‘London Smog’ that occurred
 in 1952 that resulted in more than 4000 deaths
 due to the accumulation of air pollutants over
 the city for five days.
 In Europe, around the middle of the 19th cen
tury, a black form of the Peppered moth was
 noticed in industrial areas. Usually the normal
 Peppered moth is well camouflaged on a clean
 lichen covered tree. However the peppered pat
tern was easily spotted and picked up by birds
 on the smoke blackened bark of trees in the
 industrial area, while the black form remained
 well camouflaged. Thus while the peppered
 patterned moths were successful in surviving in
 clean non-industrial areas, the black coloured
 moths were successful in industrial areas. With
 the spread of industrialization, it has been ob
served that the black forms are not only see in
 Peppered moth, but also in many other moths.
 This is a classic case of pollution leading to ad
aptation.
 113
 113
 4/9/2004, 5:09 PM
Air pollution began to increase in the beginning
 of the twentieth century with the development
 of the transportation systems and large-scale use
 of petrol and diesel. The severe air quality prob
lems due to the formation of photochemical
 smog from the combustion residues of diesel
 and petrol engines were felt for the first time in
 Los Angeles. Pollution due to auto-exhaust re
mains a serious environmental issue in many
 developed and developing countries including
 India.
 The Air Pollution Control Act in India was passed
 in 1981 and the Motor Vehicle Act for control
ling the air pollution, very recently. These laws
 are intended to prevent air from being polluted.
 The greatest industrial disaster leading to seri
ous air pollution took place in Bhopal where
 extremely poisonous methyl isocyanide gas was
 accidentally released from the Union Carbide’s
 pesticide manufacturing plant on the night of
 December 3rd 1984. The effects of this disaster
 on human health and the soil are felt even to
day.
 Structure of the atmosphere
 The atmosphere is normally composed of 79
 percent nitrogen, 20 percent oxygen and one
 percent as a mixture of carbon dioxide, water
 vapour and trace amounts of several other gases
 such as neon, helium, methane, krypton, hy
drogen and xenon. The general structure of the
 atmosphere has several important features that
 have relevance to environmental problems. The
 atmosphere is divided into several layers.
 The innermost layer the troposphere extends 17
 kilometers above sea level at the equator and
 about 8 kilometers over the poles. It contains
 about 75 percent of the mass of the earth’s air.
 The fragility of this layer is obvious from the fact
 that if the earth were an apple this particular
 layer would be no thicker than an apple’s skin.
 114
 Chapter5.p65
 Temperature declines with altitude in the tro
posphere. At the top of the troposphere tem
peratures abruptly begin to rise. This boundary
 where this temperature reversal occurs is called
 the tropopause.
 The tropopause marks the end of the tropo
sphere and the beginning of the stratosphere,
 the second layer of the atmosphere. The strato
sphere extends from 17 to 48 kilometers above
 the earth’s surface. While the composition of
 the stratosphere is similar to that of the tropo
sphere it has two major differences. The vol
ume of water vapour here is about 1000 times
 less while the volume of ozone is about 1000
 times greater. The presence of ozone in the
 stratosphere prevents about 99 percent of the
 sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation from reach
ing the earth’s surface thus protecting humans
 from cancer and damage to the immune sys
tem. This layer does not have clouds and hence
 airplanes fly in this layer as it creates less turbu
lence. Temperature rises with altitude in the
 stratosphere until there is another reversal. This
 point is called the stratopause and it marks the
 end of the stratosphere and the beginning of
 the atmosphere’s next layer, the mesosphere.
 In the mesosphere the temperature decreases
 with altitude falling up to –110 oC at the top.
 Above this is a layer where ionization of the
 gases is a major phenomenon, thus increasing
 the temperature. This layer is called the ther
mosphere. Only the lower troposphere is rou
tinely involved in our weather and hence air
 pollution. The other layers are not significant in
 determining the level of air pollution.
 Types and sources of Air Pollution
 What is air pollution?
 Air pollution occurs due to the presence of un
desirable solid or gaseous particles in the air in
 quantities that are harmful to human health and
 the environment. Air may get polluted by natu
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
 114
 4/9/2004, 5:09 PM
ral causes such as volcanoes, which release ash,
 dust, sulphur and other gases, or by forest fires
 that are occasionally naturally caused by light
ning. However, unlike pollutants from human
 activity, naturally occurring pollutants tend to
 remain in the atmosphere for a short time and
 do not lead to permanent atmospheric change.
 Pollutants that are emitted directly from identi
fiable sources are produced both by natural
 events (for example, dust storms and volcanic
 eruptions) and human activities (emission from
 vehicles, industries, etc.). These are called pri
mary pollutants. There are five primary pollut
ants that together contribute about 90 percent
 of the global air pollution. These are carbon
 oxides (CO and CO2), nitrogen oxides, sulfur
 oxides, volatile organic compounds (mostly hy
drocarbons) and suspended particulate matter.
 Pollutants that are produced in the atmosphere
 when certain chemical reactions take place
 among the primary pollutants are called second
ary pollutants. Eg: sulfuric acid, nitric acid, car
bonic acid, etc.
 Carbon monoxide is a colourless, odorless and
 toxic gas produced when organic materials such
 as natural gas, coal or wood are incompletely
 burnt. Vehicular exhausts are the single largest
 source of carbon monoxide. The number of ve
hicles has been increasing over the years all over
 the world. Vehicles are also poorly maintained
 and several have inadequate pollution control
 equipment resulting in release of greater
 amounts of carbon monoxide. Carbon monox
ide is however not a persistent pollutant. Natu
ral processes can convert carbon monoxide to
 other compounds that are not harmful. There
fore the air can be cleared of its carbon monox
ide if no new carbon monoxide is introduced
 into the atmosphere.
 Sulfur oxides are produced when sulfur contain
ing fossil fuels are burnt.
 Pollution
 Chapter5.p65
 Nitrogen oxides are found in vehicular exhausts.
 Nitrogen oxides are significant, as they are in
volved in the production of secondary air pol
lutants such as ozone.
 Hydrocarbons are a group of compounds con
sisting of carbon and hydrogen atoms. They ei
ther evaporate from fuel supplies or are
 remnants of fuel that did not burn completely.
 Hydrocarbons are washed out of the air when
 it rains and run into surface water. They cause
 an oily film on the surface and do not as such
 cause a serious issue until they react to form
 secondary pollutants. Using higher oxygen con
centrations in the fuel-air mixture and using
 valves to prevent the escape of gases, fitting of
 catalytic converters in automobiles, are some of
 the modifications that can reduce the release
 of hydrocarbons into the atmosphere.
 Particulates are small pieces of solid material (for
 example, smoke particles from fires, bits of as
bestos, dust particles and ash from industries)
 dispersed into the atmosphere. The effects of
 particulates range from soot to the carcinogenic
 (cancer causing) effects of asbestos, dust par
ticles and ash from industrial plants that are dis
persed into the atmosphere. Repeated exposure
 to particulates can cause them to accumulate
 in the lungs and interfere with the ability of the
 lungs to exchange gases.
 Lead is a major air pollutant that remains largely
 unmonitored and is emitted by vehicles. High
 lead levels have been reported in the ambient
 air in metropolitan cities. Leaded petrol is the
 primary source of airborne lead emissions in In
dian cities.
 Pollutants are also found indoors from infiltra
tion of polluted outside air and from various
 chemicals used or produced inside buildings.
 Both indoor and outdoor air pollution are equally
 harmful.
 115
 115
 4/9/2004, 5:09 PM
Types of particulates
 Term
 Meaning
 Examples
 Aerosol
 Mist
 Dust
 Smoke
 Fume
 Plume
 Fog
 Smog
 General term for particles suspended in air
 Aerosol consisting of liquid droplets
 Aerosol consisting of solid particles that are blown into
 the air or are produced from larger particles by grinding
 them down
 Aerosol consisting of solid particles or a mixture of solid
 and liquid particles produced by chemical reaction such
 as fires
 Generally means the same as smoke but often applies
 specifically to aerosols produced by condensation of hot
 vapors of metals.
 Geometrical shape or form of the smoke coming out of
 a chimney
 Aerosol consisting of water droplets
 Term used to describe a mixture of smoke and fog.
 Sprays from pressurized cans
 Sulfuric acid mist
 Dust storm
 Cigarette smoke, smoke
 from burning garbage
 Zinc/lead fumes
 What happens to pollutants in the atmo
sphere?
 Once pollutants enter the troposphere they are
 transported downwind, diluted by the large vol
ume of air, transformed through either physical
 or chemical changes or are removed from the
 atmosphere by rain during which they are at
tached to water vapour that subsequently forms
 rain or snow that falls to the earth’s surface.
 The atmosphere normally disperses pollutants
 by mixing them in the very large volume of air
 that covers the earth. This dilutes the pollutants
 to acceptable levels. The rate of dispersion how
ever varies in relation to the following aspects:
 116
 Chapter5.p65
 Topography
 Normally as the earth’s surface becomes
 warmed by sunlight the layer of air in contact
 with the ground is also heated by convection.
 This warmer air is less dense than the cold air
 above it, so it rises. Thus pollutants produced in
 the surface layer are effectively dispersed.
 However on a still evening, the process is re
versed. An hour or two before sunset after a
 sunny day, the ground starts to lose heat and
 the air near the ground begins to cool rapidly.
 Due to the absence of wind, a static layer of
 cold air is produced as the ground cools. This in
 turn induces condensation of fog. The morning
 sun cannot initially penetrate this fog layer. The
 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
 4/9/2004, 5:09 PM
 116
cold air being dense cannot rise and is trapped
 by the warm air above. It cannot move out of
 the area due to the surrounding hills. The topo
graphic features resemble a closed chemical re
actor in which the pollutants are trapped. This
 condition often continues through the cool night
 and reaches its maximum intensity before sun
rise. When the morning sun warms the ground
 the air near the ground also warms up and rises
 within an hour or two. This may be broken up
 by strong winds. In cold regions this situation
 can persist for several days. Such a situation is
 known as smog (smoke + fog).
 The most well known example is that of the
 ‘London Smog’ that occurred in 1952. The city
 used large quantities of sulphur containing coal
 for domestic heating that released smoke, along
 with smoke from thermal power plants and
 Pollution
 Chapter5.p65
 other industrial establishments. This used to lead
 to the generation of high levels of smoke con
taining sulphur oxides. Due to a sudden adverse
 meteorological condition air pollutants like
 smoke and sulphur oxides started to build-up in
 the atmosphere. The white fog accumulated
 over the city turned black forming a ‘pea-soup’
 smog with almost zero visibility. Within two days
 of the formation of this smog, people started
 suffering from acute pulmonary disorders which
 caused irritation of bronchi, cough, nasal dis
charges, sore throat, vomiting and burning sen
sations in the eyes. This event lead to several
 deaths.
 Meteorological conditions
 The velocity of the wind affects the dispersal of
 pollutants. Strong winds mix polluted air more
 rapidly with the surrounding air diluting the
 pollutants rapidly. When wind velocity is low
 mixing takes place and the concentration of
 pollutants remains high.
 117
 117
 4/9/2004, 5:09 PM
When sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides are
 transported by prevailing winds they form sec
ondary pollutants such as nitric acid vapour,
 droplets of sulfuric acid and particles of sulphate
 and nitrate salts. These chemicals descend on
 the earth’s surface in two forms: wet (as acidic
 rain, snow, fog and cloud vapour) and dry (as
 acidic particles). The resulting mixture is called
 acid deposition, commonly called acid rain.
 Acid deposition has many harmful effects espe
cially when the pH falls below 5.1 for terrestrial
 systems and below 5.5 for aquatic systems. It
 contributes to human respiratory diseases such
 as bronchitis and asthma, which can cause pre
mature death. It also damages statues, build
ings, metals and car finishes. Acid deposition
 can damage tree foliage directly but the most
 serious effect is weakening of trees so they be
come more susceptible to other types of dam
age. The nitric acid and the nitrate salts in acid
 deposition can lead to excessive soil nitrogen
 levels. This can over stimulate growth of other
 plants and intensify depletion of other impor
tant soil nutrients such as calcium and magne
sium, which in turn can reduce tree growth and
 vigour.
 Effects of air pollution on living organisms
 Our respiratory system has a number of mecha
nisms that help in protecting us from air pollu
tion. The hair in our nose filters out large
 particles. The sticky mucus in the lining of the
 upper respiratory tract captures smaller particles
 and dissolves some gaseous pollutants. When
 the upper respiratory system is irritated by pol
lutants sneezing and coughing expel contami
nated air and mucus. Prolonged smoking or
 exposure to air pollutants can overload or break
down these natural defenses causing or con
tributing to diseases such as lung cancer,
 asthma, chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Eld
erly people, infants, pregnant women and
 people with heart disease, asthma or other res
118
 Chapter5.p65
 piratory diseases are especially vulnerable to air
 pollution.
 Cigarette smoking is responsible for the great
est exposure to carbon monoxide. Exposure to
 air containing even 0.001 percent of carbon
 monoxide for several hours can cause collapse,
 coma and even death. As carbon monoxide re
mains attached to hemoglobin in blood for a
 long time, it accumulates and reduces the oxy
gen carrying capacity of blood. This impairs per
ception and thinking, slows reflexes and causes
 headaches, drowsiness, dizziness and nausea.
 Carbon monoxide in heavy traffic causes head
aches, drowsiness and blurred vision.
 Sulfur dioxide irritates respiratory tissues.
 Chronic exposure causes a condition similar to
 bronchitis. It also reacts with water, oxygen and
 other material in the air to form sulfur-contain
ing acids. The acids can become attached to
 particles which when inhaled are very corrosive
 to the lung.
 Nitrogen oxides especially NO2
 can irritate the
 lungs, aggravate asthma or chronic bronchitis
 and also increase susceptibility to respiratory
 infections such as influenza or common colds.
 Suspended particles aggravate bronchitis and
 asthma. Exposure to these particles over a long
 period of time damages lung tissue and con
tributes to the development of chronic respira
tory disease and cancer.
 Many volatile organic compounds such as (ben
zene and formaldehyde) and toxic particulates
 (such as lead, cadmium) can cause mutations,
 reproductive problems or cancer. Inhaling ozone,
 a component of photochemical smog causes
 coughing, chest pain, breathlessness and irrita
tion of the eye, nose and the throat.
 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
 118
 4/9/2004, 5:09 PM
Effects on plants
 When some gaseous pollutants enter leaf pores
 they damage the leaves of crop plants. Chronic
 exposure of the leaves to air pollutants can break
 down the waxy coating that helps prevent ex
cessive water loss and leads to damage from
 diseases, pests, drought and frost. Such expo
sure interferes with photosynthesis and plant
 growth, reduces nutrient uptake and causes
 leaves to turn yellow, brown or drop off alto
gether. At a higher concentration of sulphur
 dioxide majority of the flower buds become stiff
 and hard. They eventually fall from the plants,
 as they are unable to flower.
 Prolonged exposure to high levels of several air
 pollutants from smelters, coal burning power
 plants and industrial units as well as from cars
 and trucks can damage trees and other plants.
 Effects of air pollution on materials
 Every year air pollutants cause damage worth
 billions of rupees. Air pollutants break down
 exterior paint on cars and houses. All around
 the world air pollutants have discoloured irre
placeable monuments, historic buildings, marble
 statues, etc.
 Effects of air pollution on the stratosphere
 The upper stratosphere consists of considerable
 amounts of ozone, which works as an effective
 screen for ultraviolet light. This region called the
 ozone layer extends up to 60 kms above the
 surface of the earth. Though the ozone is
 present upto 60 kms its greatest density remains
 in the region between 20 to 25 kms. The ozone
 layer does not consist of solely ozone but a mix
ture of other common atmospheric gases. In the
 most dense ozone layer there will be only one
 ozone molecule in 100,000 gas molecules.
 Therefore even small changes in the ozone con
Pollution
 Chapter5.p65
 centration can produce dramatic effects on life
 on earth.
 The total amount of ozone in a ‘column’ of air
 from the earth’s surface upto an altitude of 50
 km is the total column ozone. This is recorded
 in Dobson Units (DU), a measure of the thick
ness of the ozone layer by an equivalent layer
 of pure ozone gas at normal temperature and
 pressure at sea level. This means that 100
 DU=1mm of pure ozone gas at normal tempera
ture and pressure at sea level.
 Ozone is a form of oxygen with three atoms
 instead of two. It is produced naturally from the
 photodissociation of oxygen gas molecules in
 the atmosphere. The ozone thus formed is con
stantly broken down by naturally occurring pro
cesses that maintain its balance in the ozone
 layer. In the absence of pollutants the creation
 and breakdown of ozone are purely governed
 by natural forces, but the presence of certain
 pollutants can accelerate the breakdown of
 ozone. Though it was known earlier that ozone
 shows fluctuations in its concentrations which
 may be accompanied sometimes with a little
 ozone depletion, it was only in 1985 that the
 large scale destruction of the ozone also called
 the Ozone Hole came into limelight when some
 British researchers published measurements
 about the ozone layer.
 Soon after these findings a greater impetus was
 given to research on the ozone layer, which
 convincingly established that CFC’s were lead
ing to its depletion. These CFCs (chloro-fluro
carbons) are extremely stable, non-flammable,
 non-toxic and harmless to handle. This makes
 them ideal for many industrial applications like
 aerosols, air conditioners, refrigerators and fire
 extinguishers. Many cans, which give out foams
 and sprays, use CFCs. (eg: perfumes, room fresh
eners, etc.) CFCs are also used in making foams
 for mattresses and cushions, disposable
 Styrofoam cups, glasses, packaging material for
 insulation, cold storage etc. However their sta
119
 119
 4/9/2004, 5:09 PM
bility also gives them a long life span in the at
mosphere.
 Halons are similar in structure to the CFCs but
 contain bromine atoms instead of chlorine. They
 are more dangerous to the ozone layer than
 CFCs. Halons are used as fire extinguishing
 agents as they do not pose a harm to people
 and equipment exposed to them during fire
 fighting.
 The CFCs and the halons migrate into the up
per atmosphere after they are released. As they
 are heavier than air they have to be carried by
 air currents up to just above the lower atmo
sphere and then they slowly diffuse into the
 upper atmosphere. This is a slow process and
 can take as long as five to fifteen years. In the
 stratosphere unfiltered UV-radiation severs the
 chemical bonds releasing chlorine from the rest
 of the CFC. This attacks the ozone molecule
 resulting in its splitting into an oxygen molecule
 and an oxygen atom.
 Despite the fact that CFCs are evenly distribute
 over the globe, the ozone depletion is especially
 pronounced over the South Pole due to the ex
treme weather conditions in the Antarctic at
mosphere. The presence of the ice crystals
 makes the Cl-O bonding easier. The ozone layer
 over countries like Australia, New Zealand, South
 Africa and parts of South America is also de
pleted.
 India has signed the Montreal Protocol in 1992,
 which aims to control the production and con
sumption of Ozone Depleting Substances.
 Ozone depletion-What does it do?
 Changes in the ozone layer have serious impli
cations for mankind.
 Effects on human health: Sunburn, cataract,
 aging of the skin and skin cancer are caused by
 120
 Chapter5.p65
 increased ultra-violet radiation. It weakens the
 immune system by suppressing the resistance
 of the whole body to certain infections like
 measles, chicken pox and other viral diseases
 that elicit rash and parasitic diseases such as
 malaria introduced through the skin.
 Food production: Ultra violet radiation affects
 the ability of plants to capture light energy dur
ing the process of photosynthesis. This reduces
 the nutrient content and the growth of plants.
 This is seen especially in legumes and cabbage.
 Plant and animal planktons are damaged by ul
tra-violet radiation. In zooplanktons (microscopic
 animals) the breeding period is shortened by
 changes in radiation. As planktons form the basis
 of the marine food chain a change in their num
ber and species composition influences fish and
 shell fish production.
 Effect on materials: Increased UV radiation
 damages paints and fabrics, causing them to
 fade faster.
 Effect on climate: Atmospheric changes in
duced by pollution contribute to global warm
ing, a phenomenon which is caused due to the
 increase in concentration of certain gases like
 carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxides, methane and
 CFCs. Observations of the earth have shown
 beyond doubt that atmospheric constituents
 such as water vapour, carbon dioxide, methane,
 nitrogen oxides and Chloro Fluro Carbons trap
 heat in the form of infra-red radiation near the
 earth’s surface. This is known as the ‘Green
house Effect’. The phenomenon is similar to
 what happens in a greenhouse. The glass in a
 greenhouse allows solar radiation to enter which
 is absorbed by the objects inside. These objects
 radiate heat in the form of terrestrial radiation,
 which does not pass out through the glass. The
 heat is therefore trapped in the greenhouse in
creasing the temperature inside and ensuring
 the luxuriant growth of plants.
 Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses
